                                                 mod.txt

                    How to Use mod Version 6.1

Quick Start 

     mod (MODify) can modify the executable files for sim, mas, 
has, vas, lin, lib, pic, mex, see, or iss so that different 
defaults are in effect on their startup.  

     To invoke mod, enter

     mod

mod then prompts for the input file name.  Enter the program to 
be modified with or without its extension. 

     To exit mod on any prompt without making any changes, enter 
"^" (without the quotes). 

     To leave a current setting in effect, at its prompt hit 
ENTER without first entering a new setting. 

     When mod is used to modify an executable program, it prompts 
the user for various settings for that program.  If you enter "<" 
in response to any of these prompts, mod resets that setting to 
its default value.  Thus, to reset a program to all its default 
settings, you can enter "<" in response to each prompt.  
Alternatively, you can simply specify the /r command line 
argument when you invoke mod.  mod then uses a response file 
containing all the default values for that program.  For example, 
to reset mas to all of its default settings, enter 

     mod mas /r 

     To see the settings in effect for any program, run mod 
against that program, and hit ENTER is response to every prompt.
mod will then display all the current settings.  For example, to 
see the current settings for mas, enter

     mod mas

and then hit ENTER in response to the prompts.  Before 
terminating, mod will display all the current settings of mas.  For 
example:

     No changes made to mas.exe

     Current settings in mas.exe:
        Number base         = d (decimal)
        Label status        = s (sensitive)
        List status         = L (list on)
        Message status      = m (messages on)
        Sym tab display     = e (enabled)
        Car file status     = c (car file on)
        Reverse comments    = e (enabled)
        Reverse file status = r (reverse file on)
        Reverse delimiter   = //
        Rev start column    = 25 (dec)
        Config file name    = none



For sim, mod can change 

     - the student's name (the default is "Run mod sim /r to put 
       your name here").  If a name is entered, it will be 
       inserted at the beginning of every log file--a convenient 
       feature if students submit their log files for homework 
       assignments.  Maximum length of a name is 43 characters.  
       Names longer than 43 characters are truncated.  If a 
       leading period is specified in the name entered, then the 
       name immediately following the period up to the first 
       whitespace is incorporated into log file names.  If the 
       entry in a response file for this item is ?, mod will 
       prompt the user for a name.  Otherwise, it will use 
       whatever string appears in the response file. 

     - the microlevel status (disabled or enabled)

     - the simulation mode (horizontal or vertical).  If a 
       microcode file name with its extension is specified as a 
       command line argument, it determines the simulation mode, 
       regardless of this setting.  That is, horizontal microcode 
       forces a horizontal simulation; vertical microcode forces 
       vertical simulation.  If a microcode file name is 
       specified WITHOUT an extension, then this setting 
       determines the default extension (".hor" or ".ver"). 

     - the horizontal microcode file name or "none".  If none, 
       sim uses the built-in microcode or, if specified, the 
       microcode specified by a command line argument or a !-
       directive.  This microcode is used if the simulation mode 
       is horizontal (see above) and a microcode file has not 
       been specified on a command line argument or on a !-
       directive. 

     - the vertical microcode file name or "none".  If none, sim 
       uses the built-in microcode or, if specified, the 
       microcode specified by a command line argument or a !-
       directive.  This microcode is used if the simulation mode 
       is vertical (see above) and a microcode file has not been 
       specified on a command line argument or on a !-directive. 

     - SD default extension.  If the SD command is invoked 
       without a filename argument, the file whose extension is 
       equal to this setting and whose base name matches that of 
       the executing ".mac" is displayed.  This extension may be 
       entered with or without a leading ".". 

     - the command line address or "none".  If the command line 
       address is changed, startup code in sup.mas and ksup.mas 
       must be reassembled with the new address. 

     - the memory-mapped starting address

     - the memory-mapped delay

     - the load point

     - the T count (the initial default T command when in
       machine-level display mode)

     - the tracing mode pause count (a pause in execution occurs 
       whenever the microinstruction count is a multiple of this 
       number).  The default value is 20,000 for all display 
       modes except no display.  For no display mode, it is 20 
       times the count for the other modes.  

     - the LD max size (the maximum number of lines displayed by 
       the LD command on each invocation).  LD max size must be 
       between 1 and 120 decimal, inclusive. 

     - the source only status at the machine-level--determines if 
       only source lines are displayed when in machine-level 
       display mode 

     - the plus counts status (determines if microinstruction 
       counts are displayed in addition to the regular 
       information when in machine-level display mode) 

     - the plus reads status (determines if addresses and data 
       are displayed on a read in addition to the regular 
       information when in machine-level display mode) 

     - plus source status at the machine-level (determines if 
       source lines are displayed in addition to the regular 
       information when in machine-level display mode) 

     - source only status at the microlevel (determines if only 
       source lines are displayed when in microlevel display 
       mode) 

     - plus source status at the microlevel (determines if source 
       lines are displayed in addition to the regular information 
       when in microlevel display mode) 

     - the label status (sensitive or insensitive) when in
       plus source or source only display mode.

     - the hout status (determines if leading zeros or no leading 
       zeros are displayed when hout is executed) 

     - the log file status.  The default is off.

     - the program verification status.  The default is on.

     - the return code status.  The default is off (i.e., the
       return code from a halted program that sim has run is 
       forced to 0, which is, in turn, returned by sim to the
       operating system). 

     - the message status--determines if non-error/non-warning 
       console messages are displayed 

     Microlevel status, simulation mode, horizontal microcode 
     file name, vertical microcode file name, command line 
     address, memory-mapped I/O start address, load point, and 
     log file status, can be overridden by command line 
     arguments.  Source only, plus counts, plus reads, and plus 
     source status can be controlled by the debugger commands MC, 
     MC-, MR, MR-, MS, MS-, MSO, MSO-, ms, ms-, mso, and mso-.  

     The source only option at the machine-level is mutually 
     exclusive with the plus counts, the plus reads, and the 
     plus source (machine-level) options.  Thus, if the source 
     only option is selected, mod automatically turns off the 
     plus counts, plus reads, and plus source (machine-level) 
     options.   

     The source only option at the microlevel is mutually 
     exclusive with the plus source option at the microlevel.
     Thus, if the source only option is selected, mod 
     automatically turns off the plus source option at the
     microlevel.

     For the horizontal and vertical microcode file names, 
     either the file names or the file basenames are 
     acceptable.  In the latter case, the extensions default to 
     ".hor" or ".ver", respectively.  

     Numbers entered without a "t" suffix are treated as hex 
     numbers unless the prompt message for the entry indicates 
     decimal.  Numbers entered with a "t"suffix are treated as 
     decimal numbers. 



For mas, mod can change 

     - the number base used (decimal or hex)

     - the label status (sensitive or insensitive)

     - the list status (list on or no list).

     - message status (determines if non-error/non-warning 
       console messages are displayed)

     - symbol table display in the ".lst" file (enabled or
       disabled)

     - car file status (car file on or no car file)

     - reverse comments (enabled or disabled).  If enabled, mas 
       will treat "//" comments as input when assembling a file 
       with a ".cpp", ".c", ".java", or ".jav" extension (see the 
       section "Reverse comments in mas.txt). 

     - reverse comment delimiter (the comment delimiter for 
       assembly code in a C++/C/Java file).  The default is "//".  
       It can be set to "//" followed by an optional third 
       character.  

     - reverse file status (reverse file on or no reverse file)

     - Reverse comments start column (the column to which 
       C++/C/Java code is moved when reverse commenting is in 
       effect).  The default is 25. The start column may be set 
       to any value from 1 to 79. Setting the start column to a 
       low value forces the C++/C/Java code to be positioned to 
       the immediate right of the assembly code, rather than all 
       starting in the same column. 

     - the configuration file name

     All of these settings, except for message status, symbol 
     table display, reverse comments, reverse start column, and 
     reverse comment delimiter, can be overriden by command line 
     arguments. 

     For the configuration file name, either the file name or 
     the file basename is acceptable.  In the latter case, 
     the extension defaults to ".cfg".  



For has and vas, mod can change 

     - the number base used (decimal or hex)

     - the label status (sensitive or insensitive)

     - the list status (no list or list).

     - message status (determines if non-error/non-warning 
       console messages are displayed)

     All of these settings, except for message status, can be 
     overriden by command line arguments. 



For lin, mod can change
     
     - the label status of PUBLIC and EXTERN symbols 
       (sensitive or insensitive).

     - the table file status (no table file or table file).

     - the cat file status (no cat file or cat file)

     - message status (determines if non-error/non-warning 
       console messages are displayed)

     All of these settings, except for message status, can be 
     overriden by command line arguments. 



For lib, mod can change

     - message status (determines if non-error/non-warning 
       console messages are displayed)
    


For pic, mex, and see, mod can change

     - the list status (no list or list).

     - message status (determines if non-error/non-warning 
       console messages are displayed)


     List status can be overriden by a command line argument. 



For iss, mod can change

     - the reverse comment delimiter.  The default is "//".

     - message status (determines if non-error/non-warning 
       console messages are displayed)


To use mod, enter

   mod

mod then prompts the user for a filename.  Enter the file name of 
the program to be modified, with or without its extension, and/or 
other desired command line arguments (any number of items per 
input line).  Once the user enters an input file name, mod then 
prompts the user for the changes requested.  If the ENTER key is 
hit in response to a prompt without first entering a reply, mod 
skips that change.  Before terminating, mod lists the new 
settings.  To view the current settings of a program without 
making any changes, run mod and skip each change by hitting the 
ENTER key without first entering a reply. 


Command Line Arguments

     All command  line arguments are optional, can be specified in 
any order, must have no embedded spaces, and must be separated by 
at least one space. 

     All command line arguments, except <infilename>, must have a 
leading "/" or "-". 

     All command line arguments are case insensitive, except for 
filenames on systems with case-sensitive filenames. 

     The format of the command line is

   mod   <infilename>   /h  /r<rspfilename>
                        /?

mod applies its changes to the file whose name is <infilename>.  
If <infilename> is specified on the command line, then mod will 
not prompt the user for additional input.  In response to a 
prompt, the user can enter <infilename> and/or other command line 
arguments.  Prompting ends whenever the user enters <infilename>.  
Microsoft systems only: if <infilename> has no extension, then 
".exe" is appended to it.  If <infilename> starts with a pathname 
that starts with "/", then substitute "//" for the leading "/" in 
the pathname when entering <infilename>.  

/h or /? displays a help screen.

/r causes mod to use the specified response file for input.  If 
<rspfilename> has no extension, ".rsp" is assumed.  If 
<rspfilename> is omitted, the response file name defaults to 
<infilename_less_ext>.rsp.  If ? is the first line of a response 
file used to configure sim, mod will prompt the user for a name.  
If the first line is anything other than ?, mod will use that 
line as input (in which case it will not prompt the user for a 
name).  Comments are permitted in a response file, but they must 
start with a ";".  mod ignores a line that contains only a 
comment.  However, completely blank lines in a response file are 
treated as responses.  That is, a blank line corresponds to an 
entry in which the user hits ENTER without first entering a 
response (the effect of which is to keep the current setting).  
Each modifiable program in the H1 Software Package comes with a 
response file that sets the program to its "factory" defaults.  
For example, entering 

     mod sim /r

sets sim to its factory defaults using the sim.rsp response file.
Because the first line of sim.rsp is "?", mod will prompt the 
user for an name rather than using a response from the response 
file.


Using o.hor, k.hor, or r.hor Microcode 
     
    To use mod to change mas and sim so that they use by default 
the optimal instruction set defined by o.hor and o.cfg, do the 
following: 

To change mas:

Enter

     mod mas 

Hit ENTER until the following prompts appears:

  Enter config file name, "none", or hit ENTER for no change. 

Enter

     o 

Then on the prompt that asks if it is okay to change mas, enter 

     y

To change sim:

Enter 

     mod sim 

Hit ENTER until the following prompt appears:

  Enter horizontal file name, "none", or hit ENTER for no change.

Enter

     o 

and then hit ENTER until the prompt message that asks if it is okay 
to change sim appears.  Then enter

     y 

     To use the stack instruction, enter as above, except 
substitute "k" for "o".

     To use the really-simple instruction, enter as above, except 
substitute "r" for "o".


Problem with a Leading "/" in Command Line Arguments on Non-
Microsoft Systems

     Command line arguments typically start with "/" on Microsoft 
systems, and with "-" on other systems.  For the sake of 
uniformity, all the programs in the H1 Software Package allow a 
command line argument to start with EITHER "/" or "-" on any of 
the supported platforms.  Unfortunately, allowing "/" to start a 
command line argument on non-Microsoft systems can cause a 
problem.  For example, suppose you want to specify an input file 
on the command line.  Recall that an input file argument is not 
preceded by an argument marker.  For example in, 

    sim a /ms

the argument "a" (which specifies the input file a.mac) does NOT 
have a preceding "/" or "-".  "/ms", on the other hand, has the 
argument marker "/".  "/ms" is interpreted as the "/m" argument 
followed by the secondary argument "s".  Now suppose the input 
file you want to specify on the command line is 

     /abc.x

This denotes the abc.x file in the root directory "/".  
Unfortunately, all the programs in the H1 Software Package will 
interpret a leading "/" as an argument marker rather than as the 
root directory.  Thus, 

     /abc.x

on the command line is incorrectly interpreted as the argument 

     /a 

followed by the secondary argument

     bc.x

This problem does not occur on Microsoft systems because they use 
"\" rather than "/" as the filename separator, and, thus, there 
is never any confusion with the argument marker "/". 

You will probably rarely run into this problem because full 
pathnames are rarely needed when using the programs in the H1 
Software Package.  However, if the problem does occur, it can 
easily be circumvented: simply use "//" to represent the root.  
For example, if 

     //abc.x

appears on a command line, it is interpreted as the input file

     /abc.x

Do NOT use "//" in place of "/" within a command line argument.
For example, in the following invocation of sim,

     sim a /m/mnt/floppy/s.hor

the microcode file /mnt/floppy/s.hor is specified within the /m 
command line argument.  Thus, "//" should NOT be used in place of 
the leading "/" in "/mnt/floppy/s.hor". 
